## Rumination

### A habit-goal framework of depressive rumination

abstract

>Rumination has been robustly implicated in the onset and maintenance of depression. However, despite empirically well-supported theories of the consequences of trait rumination (response styles theory; Nolen-Hoeksema, 1991), and of the processes underlying state episodes of goal-oriented repetitive thought (control theory; Martin & Tesser, 1989, 1996), the relationship between these theories remains unresolved. Further, less theoretical and clinical attention has been paid to the maintenance and treatment of trait depressive rumination. We propose that conceptualizing rumination as a mental habit (Hertel, 2004) helps to address these issues. Elaborating on this account, we propose a framework linking the response styles and control theories via a theoretical approach to the relationship between habits and goals (Wood & Neal, 2007). In this model, with repetition in the same context, episodes of self-focused repetitive thought triggered by goal discrepancies can become habitual, through a process of automatic association between the behavioral response (i.e., repetitive thinking) and any context that occurs repeatedly with performance of the behavior (e.g., physical location, mood), and in which the repetitive thought is contingent on the stimulus context. When the contingent response involves a passive focus on negative content and abstract construal, the habit of depressive rumination is acquired. Such habitual rumination is cued by context independent of goals and is resistant to change. This habit framework has clear treatment implications and generates novel testable predictions.



### Changes in ruminative thinking mediate the clinical benefits of mindfulness: Preliminary findings

abstract

> We investigated whether the clinical benefits of mindfulness training are mediated by a reduction in maladaptive rumination and an increase in adaptive rumination. Participants in eight-session mindfulness training were assessed before and after treatment, while waiting-list controls were assessed at similar times. For the mindfulness training, a treatment manual was derived from the mindfulness-based cognitive therapy procedure and adapted to account for the consequences of stress, anxiety, and depression rather than just depression. Replicating previous findings, results indicate that mindfulness training, as compared to the waiting-list condition, reduces general psychopathology. It was also found that mindfulness training reduces maladaptive rumination and increases adaptive rumination. Mediational analyses further suggest that clinical benefits of mindfulness required changes in ruminative mode of processing. Results are discussed in terms of Teasdale et al.’s assumption that mindfulness training is effective because it reduces maladaptive rumination.

### The effects of worry and rumination on affect states and cognitive activity.

DOI: [10.1016/j.beth.2006.03.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2006.03.003)

Abstract

> The effects of worry and rumination on affective states and mentation type were examined in an unselected undergraduate sample in Study 1 and in a sample of individuals with high trait worry and rumination, high rumination, and low worry/rumination in Study 2. Participants engaged in worry and rumination inductions, counterbalanced in order across participants to assess main and interactive effects of these types of negative thinking. During mentation periods, the thought vs. imaginal nature and the temporal orientation of mentations were assessed 5 times. Following mentation periods, negative and positive affect, relaxation, anxiety, and depression were assessed. Both worry and rumination produced increases in negative affect and decreases in positive affect. Worry tended to generate greater anxiety, and rumination tended to generate greater depression. Interactive effects were also found indicating that worry may lessen the anxiety experienced during subsequent rumination. Moreover, worry lessened the depressing effects of rumination. Worry was associated with significantly greater thought than imagery, compared to rumination. Rumination involved a progression from mentation about the past to mentation about the future over time. Implications for understanding the generation of negative affect and comorbid anxiety and depression are discussed.

### How thinking hurts: Rumination, worry, and avoidance processes in adjustment to bereavement

Abstract

> Repetitive negative thought plays an important role in the maintenance of mental health problems following bereavement. To date, bereavement researchers have primarily focused on rumination (i.e., repetitive thought about negative events and/or negative emotions), yet the interest in worry (i.e., repetitive thought about uncertain future events) is increasing. Both cognitive processes potentially lead to poorer adaptation to bereavement by contributing to loss‐related avoidance and behavioural avoidance of activities. The current study aims to establish the differential associations of rumination and worry with symptoms of depression and prolonged grief and clarify if avoidance processes mediate the associations of rumination and worry with symptom levels. Four hundred seventy‐four recently bereaved adults (82% female) filled out questionnaires assessing rumination, worry, loss‐related and behavioural avoidance, and depression and prolonged grief symptoms. Rumination and worry were both uniquely associated with depression and prolonged grief symptoms. Compared with worry, rumination related more strongly to prolonged grief symptoms, whereas correlations of both cognitive styles with depression symptoms did not differ. Loss‐related avoidance and behavioural avoidance partially mediated the associations of rumination and worry with prolonged grief symptoms. Behavioural avoidance partially mediated the associations of rumination and worry with depression symptoms. Findings suggest that exposure and behavioural activation may be effective interventions to reduce repetitive thinking and psychopathology after bereavement.

### A roadmap to rumination: a review of the definition, assessment, and conceptualization of this multifaceted construct.

Abstract

> Rumination has been widely studied and is a crucial component in the study of cognitive vulnerabilities to depression. However, rumination means different things in the context of different theories, and has not been uniformly defined or measured. This article aims to review models of rumination, as well as the various ways in which it is assessed. The models are compared and contrasted with respect to several important dimensions of rumination. Guidelines to consider in the selection of a model and measure of rumination are presented, and suggestions for the conceptualization of rumination are offered. In addition, rumination's relation to other similar constructs is evaluated. Finally, future directions for the study of ruminative phenomena are presented. It is hoped that this article will be a useful guide to those interested in studying the multi-faceted construct of rumination.

### Reflecting on **rumination**: Consequences, causes, mechanisms and **treatment** of  rumination

Abstract

>We review research showing that rumination has multiple negative consequences: (a) exacerbating [psychopathology](https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/psychology/psychopathology) by magnifying and prolonging negative mood states, interfering with problem-solving and instrumental behaviour and reducing sensitivity to changing contingencies; (b) acting as a transdiagnostic mental health vulnerability impacting anxiety, depression, psychosis, insomnia, and [impulsive behaviours](https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/medicine-and-dentistry/impulsiveness); (c) interfering with therapy and limiting the efficacy of psychological interventions; (d) exacerbating and maintaining [physiological stress](https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/medicine-and-dentistry/physiological-stress) responses. The mechanisms underlying rumination are examined, and a model (H-EX-A-GO-N – Habit development, EXecutive control, Abstract processing, GOal discrepancies, Negative bias) is proposed to account for the onset and maintenance of rumination. H-EX-A-GO-N outlines how rumination results from dwelling on problematic goals developing into a learnt habit that involves the tendency to process negative information in an abstract way, particularly in the context of poor executive control and negative information-processing biases. These proximal factors integrate experimental evidence to provide a partial answer to the critical question of what maintains rumination. They constitute a pathway by which more distal biological and environmental factors increase the likelihood of rumination developing. Treatments for rumination are reviewed, with preliminary trials suggesting that psychological interventions designed to specifically target these mechanisms may be effective at reducing rumination.

### Collaborative Self-management of Depression

cscw 2019 doctoral consortium: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3311957.3361851

> My dissertation focuses on the **role of collaboration** in depression self-management. Mental health self-management is often viewed as an individual activity, yet individual-focused solutions (e.g., self-tracking) often miss important support from social networks. My preliminary study investigated self-management of individuals with depression. Participants used a variety of technology channels to connect with others to express their moods and create solutions to challenges. However, these connections can also be a source of conflict. Next, I will investigate collaborations between individuals managing depression and their close ties to understand how these activities play out in-person and through technology.

### "I think people are powerful": The Sociality of Individuals Managing Depression

CSCW 2019: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3359143

> Millions of Americans struggle with depression, a condition characterized by feelings of sadness and motivation loss. To understand how individuals managing depression conceptualize their self-management activities, we conducted visual elicitations and semi-structured interviews with 30 participants managing depression in a large city in the U.S. Midwest. Many depression support tools are focused on the individual user and do not often incorporate social features. However, our analysis showed **the key importance of sociality for self-management of depression.** We describe how individuals **connect** with specific others to achieve expected support and how these interactions are mediated through locations and communication channels. We discuss factors influencing participants' sociality including relationship roles and expectations, mood state and communication channels, location and privacy, and culture and society. We broaden our understanding of sociality in CSCW through discussing diffuse sociality (being proximate to others but not interacting directly) as an important activity to support depression self-management.

### "I just let him cry...: Designing Socio-Technical Interventions in Families to Prevent Mental Health Disorders

CSCW2018: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3274429

> Interventions that help children develop protective factors against mental health disorders are an inherently social endeavour, relying on a number of actors from within the family as well as the school context. Little work thus far in CSCW and HCI has examined the potential of technology to support or enhance such interventions. This paper provides the first steps to unpacking this socio-technical design space, focusing on **emotional regulation (ER)** as a specific instance of a **protective factor**. We combine a user-centred approach to understanding lived experiences of families (interviews, design workshops) with an expert-led understanding of what makes interventions psychologically effective. Our findings suggest the potential of technology to enable a shift in how prevention interventions are designed and delivered: empowering children and parents through a new model of 'child-led, situated interventions', where participants learn through actionable support directly within family life, as opposed to didactic in-person workshops and a subsequent 'skills application'. This conceptual model was then instantiated in a technology probe, which was deployed with 14 families. The promising field study findings provide an initial proof-of-concept validation of the proposed approach.

### Personal Informatics in Interpersonal Contexts: Towards the Design of Technology that Supports the Social Ecologies of Long-Term Mental Health Management

CSCW2018: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3274396

> Personal informatics systems for supporting health largely grew out of a **"self"-centric orientation: self-tracking, self-reflection, self-knowledge, self-experimentation, self-improvement.** Health management, however, even when self-driven, is inherently social and depends on a person's direct relationships and broader sociocultural contexts, as an emerging line of research is coming to recognize, study, and support. This is particularly true in the case of mental health. In this paper, we engage with individuals managing the serious mental illness bipolar disorder and members of their support circles to (a) identify key social relations and the roles they play in condition management, (b) characterize patients' complex interactions with these relations (e.g., positive or negative, direct or peripheral, steady or unstable), and (c) understand how personal informatics mediates these recovery relations. Based on these insights, we offer a model of this social ecology, along with **design implications for personal informatics systems that are sensitive to these interpersonal contexts.**

### Beyond the Coded Gaze: Analyzing Expression of Mental Health and Illness on Instagram

CSCW2018

> In CSCW and HCI, work examining expression of mental health and illness on social media frequently aims to classify content, quantify visual trends, and predict user states. **This approach to analysis is a form of the coded gaze,** a type of algorithmic 'way of seeing' coined with respect to artificial intelligence techniques. The coded gaze classifies content through researcher- and machine-labeled categories, relying on a series of theoretical assumptions that influence how values pertaining to mental health and illness become inscribed in data. In this paper, we build upon this research to support alternative methods of data interpretation. We join manual collection of Instagram posts with semi-structured interviews and digital ethnography over six months to understand how Instagram users express their experiences with mental health and illness. We argue that individuals negotiate claims to mental health and illness through visibility and signaling, the boundaries between mental health and illness are porous and blurred, and reposting and remix are a form of participation. We discuss practical and ethical implications for studying the expression of mental health and illness online.

### Design for Rituals of Letting Go: An Embodiment Perspective on Disposal Practices Informed by Grief Therapy

TOCHI2016: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2926714

People increasingly live their lives online, accruing large collections of digital possessions, which symbolically represent important relationships, events, and activities. Most HCI research on bereavement focuses on retaining these significant digital possessions to honor the departed. However, recent work suggests that significant digital possessions may complicate moving on; they function as both comforting and painful reminders but currently provide inflexible methods for disposal. A few works have investigated the disposal of digital objects as a means of letting go. To better understand this we interviewed 10 psychotherapists who employ rituals of letting go to help patients overcome loss in situations such as a divorce, a breakup, or a stillbirth. Patients disposed of either natural artifacts or symbolic personal possessions through actions such as burning, burying, or placing in a body of water. Therapists noted that people increasingly have digital possessions, and that the act of deletion does not offer the same cathartic sense of release as disposal of material artifacts. Based on the analysis of this grief therapy, we propose a new conceptual framework for rituals of letting go that highlights temporality, visibility, and force. It provides a vocabulary to talk about disposal. **We then offer design implications connecting the rituals of letting go to the disposal of digital things.** Based on our interviews and analytic framework, we propose novel technologies that better connect the embodied nature of letting go rituals to the process of digital disposal.

### Everyday Experiences: Small Stories and Mental Illness on Instagram

CHI’19 Honorable Mention

> Despite historical precedence and modern prevalence, mental illness and associated disorders **are frequently aligned with notions of deviance and, by association, abnormality**. The view that mental illness deviates from an implicit social norm permeates the CHI community, impacting how scholars approach research in this space. In this paper, we challenge community and societal norms aligning mental illness with deviance. We combine semi-structured interviews with digital ethnography of public Instagram accounts to examine how Instagram users express mental illness. Drawing on small stories research, we find that individuals situate mental illness within their everyday lives and negotiate their tellings of experience due to the influence of various social control structures. We discuss implications for incorporating 'the everyday' into the design of technological solutions for marginalized communities and the ways in which researchers and designers may inadvertently perpetuate and instantiate stigma related to mental illness.

### The Effect of Moderation on Online Mental Health Conversations

> Many people struggling with mental health issues are unable to access adequate care due to high costs and a shortage of mental health professionals, leading to a global mental health crisis. Online mental health communities can help mitigate this crisis by offering a scalable, easily accessible alternative to in-person sessions with therapists or support groups. However, people seeking emotional or psychological support online may be especially vulnerable to the kinds of antisocial behavior that sometimes occur in online discussions. Moderation can improve online discourse quality, but we lack an understanding of its effects on online mental health conversations. In this work, we leveraged a natural experiment, occurring across 200,000 messages from 7,000 conversations hosted on a mental health mobile application, to evaluate the effects of moderation on online mental health discussions. We found that participation in group mental health discussions led to improvements in psychological perspective, and that these improvements were larger in moderated conversations. **The presence of a moderator increased user engagement, encouraged users to discuss negative emotions more candidly, and dramatically reduced bad behavior among chat participants. Moderation also encouraged stronger linguistic coordination, which is indicative of trust building. In addition, moderators who remained active in conversations were especially successful in keeping conversations on topic.** Our findings suggest that moderation can serve as a valuable tool to improve the efficacy and safety of online mental health conversations. Based on these findings, we discuss implications and trade-offs involved in designing effective online spaces for mental health support.

>This paper points out that AI could serve as the moderator in the process of human-human communications for mental health as well.

### Post-event rumination and negative self-appraisal in social phobia before and after treatment.