## Rumination

### A habit-goal framework of depressive rumination

abstract

>Rumination has been robustly implicated in the onset and maintenance of depression. However, despite empirically well-supported theories of the consequences of trait rumination (response styles theory; Nolen-Hoeksema, 1991), and of the processes underlying state episodes of goal-oriented repetitive thought (control theory; Martin & Tesser, 1989, 1996), the relationship between these theories remains unresolved. Further, less theoretical and clinical attention has been paid to the maintenance and treatment of trait depressive rumination. We propose that conceptualizing rumination as a mental habit (Hertel, 2004) helps to address these issues. Elaborating on this account, we propose a framework linking the response styles and control theories via a theoretical approach to the relationship between habits and goals (Wood & Neal, 2007). In this model, with repetition in the same context, episodes of self-focused repetitive thought triggered by goal discrepancies can become habitual, through a process of automatic association between the behavioral response (i.e., repetitive thinking) and any context that occurs repeatedly with performance of the behavior (e.g., physical location, mood), and in which the repetitive thought is contingent on the stimulus context. When the contingent response involves a passive focus on negative content and abstract construal, the habit of depressive rumination is acquired. Such habitual rumination is cued by context independent of goals and is resistant to change. This habit framework has clear treatment implications and generates novel testable predictions.

### Assessing treatments used to reduce rumination and/or worry: A systematic review

Abstract

> Perseverative cognitions such as rumination and worry are key components of mental illnesses such as depression and anxiety. Given the frequent comorbidity of conditions in which rumination and worry are present, it is possible that they are underpinned by the same cognitive process. Furthermore, rumination and worry appear to be part of a causal chain that can lead to long-term health consequences, including cardiovascular disease and other chronic conditions. It is important therefore to understand what interventions may be useful in reducing their incidence. This systematic review aimed to assess treatments used to reduce worry and/or rumination. As we were interested in understanding the current treatment landscape, we limited our search from 2002 to 2012. Nineteen studies were included in the review and were assessed for methodological quality and treatment integrity. Results suggested that mindfulness-based and cognitive behavioural interventions may be effective in the reduction of both rumination and worry; with both Internet-delivered and face-to-face delivered formats useful. More broadly, it appears that treatments in which participants are encouraged to change their thinking style, or to disengage from emotional response to rumination and/or worry (e.g., through mindful techniques), could be helpful. Implications for treatment and avenues for future research are discussed.

### Changes in ruminative thinking mediate the clinical benefits of mindfulness: Preliminary findings

abstract

> We investigated whether the clinical benefits of mindfulness training are mediated by a reduction in maladaptive rumination and an increase in adaptive rumination. Participants in eight-session mindfulness training were assessed before and after treatment, while waiting-list controls were assessed at similar times. For the mindfulness training, a treatment manual was derived from the mindfulness-based cognitive therapy procedure and adapted to account for the consequences of stress, anxiety, and depression rather than just depression. Replicating previous findings, results indicate that mindfulness training, as compared to the waiting-list condition, reduces general psychopathology. It was also found that mindfulness training reduces maladaptive rumination and increases adaptive rumination. Mediational analyses further suggest that clinical benefits of mindfulness required changes in ruminative mode of processing. Results are discussed in terms of Teasdale et al.’s assumption that mindfulness training is effective because it reduces maladaptive rumination.

### Could mindfulness decrease anger, hostility, and aggression by decreasing rumination?

Abstract

> Research suggests that rumination increases anger and aggression. Mindfulness, or present-focused and intentional awareness, may counteract rumination. Using structural equation modeling, we examined the relations between mindfulness, rumination, and aggression. In a pair of studies, we found a pattern of correlations consistent with rumination partially mediating a causal link between mindfulness and hostility, anger, and verbal aggression. The pattern was not consistent with rumination mediating the association between mindfulness and physical aggression. Although it is impossible with the current nonexperimental data to test causal mediation, these correlations support the idea that mindfulness could reduce rumination, which in turn could reduce aggression. These results suggest that longitudinal work and experimental manipulations mindfulness would be worthwhile approaches for further study of rumination and aggression. We discuss possible implications of these results.

### Exploring Fitness Tracker Visualisations to Avoid Rumination

doi: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3379503.3405662

abstract

>Fitness trackers encourage users to set goals to improve personal wellbeing, but these goals sometimes remain unmet. Understanding how improved ways of communicating failure to meet fitness goals could help prevent negative thought cycles (rumination) and avoid reduced motivation for physical activity. To address this challenge, we studied how unmet goals can be presented in apps. We designed prototypes that showed unmet fitness goals. Radial and regular bar charts, single-coloured and multicoloured were used in the study. In a survey (n = 165), we compared the four versions and a textual description of the unmet goals. Then, we conducted follow-up interviews (n = 20) to gain a detailed understanding of the perceptions and feelings evoked by the prototypes. We found that bar graphs offered a significantly better potential for reflection and multicoloured charts triggered significantly more rumination. We contribute in-depth insights into designing systems that use goals and avoid potential negative effects of personal tracking.

### The effects of worry and rumination on affect states and cognitive activity.

DOI: [10.1016/j.beth.2006.03.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2006.03.003)

Abstract

> The effects of worry and rumination on affective states and mentation type were examined in an unselected undergraduate sample in Study 1 and in a sample of individuals with high trait worry and rumination, high rumination, and low worry/rumination in Study 2. Participants engaged in worry and rumination inductions, counterbalanced in order across participants to assess main and interactive effects of these types of negative thinking. During mentation periods, the thought vs. imaginal nature and the temporal orientation of mentations were assessed 5 times. Following mentation periods, negative and positive affect, relaxation, anxiety, and depression were assessed. Both worry and rumination produced increases in negative affect and decreases in positive affect. Worry tended to generate greater anxiety, and rumination tended to generate greater depression. Interactive effects were also found indicating that worry may lessen the anxiety experienced during subsequent rumination. Moreover, worry lessened the depressing effects of rumination. Worry was associated with significantly greater thought than imagery, compared to rumination. Rumination involved a progression from mentation about the past to mentation about the future over time. Implications for understanding the generation of negative affect and comorbid anxiety and depression are discussed.

### How thinking hurts: Rumination, worry, and avoidance processes in adjustment to bereavement

Abstract

> Repetitive negative thought plays an important role in the maintenance of mental health problems following bereavement. To date, bereavement researchers have primarily focused on rumination (i.e., repetitive thought about negative events and/or negative emotions), yet the interest in worry (i.e., repetitive thought about uncertain future events) is increasing. Both cognitive processes potentially lead to poorer adaptation to bereavement by contributing to loss‐related avoidance and behavioural avoidance of activities. The current study aims to establish the differential associations of rumination and worry with symptoms of depression and prolonged grief and clarify if avoidance processes mediate the associations of rumination and worry with symptom levels. Four hundred seventy‐four recently bereaved adults (82% female) filled out questionnaires assessing rumination, worry, loss‐related and behavioural avoidance, and depression and prolonged grief symptoms. Rumination and worry were both uniquely associated with depression and prolonged grief symptoms. Compared with worry, rumination related more strongly to prolonged grief symptoms, whereas correlations of both cognitive styles with depression symptoms did not differ. Loss‐related avoidance and behavioural avoidance partially mediated the associations of rumination and worry with prolonged grief symptoms. Behavioural avoidance partially mediated the associations of rumination and worry with depression symptoms. Findings suggest that exposure and behavioural activation may be effective interventions to reduce repetitive thinking and psychopathology after bereavement.

### A roadmap to rumination: a review of the definition, assessment, and conceptualization of this multifaceted construct.

Abstract

> Rumination has been widely studied and is a crucial component in the study of cognitive vulnerabilities to depression. However, rumination means different things in the context of different theories, and has not been uniformly defined or measured. This article aims to review models of rumination, as well as the various ways in which it is assessed. The models are compared and contrasted with respect to several important dimensions of rumination. Guidelines to consider in the selection of a model and measure of rumination are presented, and suggestions for the conceptualization of rumination are offered. In addition, rumination's relation to other similar constructs is evaluated. Finally, future directions for the study of ruminative phenomena are presented. It is hoped that this article will be a useful guide to those interested in studying the multi-faceted construct of rumination.