#### Part 1: History and Context of TDI
##### Chapter 1: Sleep and Dream Science History
> Parallels: Mind Wandering, Lucid Dreaming, Psychedelia, Psychoanalysis

The experience of lucid dreaming stretches one’s understanding of a cohesive self and exposes an interior other. One study from Gestalt psychologist Paul Tholey (who spent much of his career trying to prove that dreams occurred in color) had proficient lucid dreamers ask characters they encountered in their lucid dreams to perform specific tasks. These characters are often called morphai (adapted from Greek Mythology in Hesiod’s Theogeny) and they are both the dreamer and the creation of the dreamer, insofar as their minds are made by the dreamer’s mind. Tholey found the vast majority of morphai answers to even very simple math tasks, such as 2 + 3, were wrong, but they solved verbal tasks well. In a handful of cases, dream characters first gave a wrong answer, then corrected themselves. When one lucid dreamer gave a dream character what he thought was the correct answer to a math problem, the dream figure corrected him – and was right. Some of the characters had intensely emotional reactions to being challenged with a math problem. One character started to cry, another ran away, others replied that the question was too personal or the answers were either too subjective or important to be shared. It is amazing that I, as a dreamer, can create minds which surprise or evade me. Lucid dreaming specifically enables cognitive control within the dream and allows for a state of doubting and questioning that is typically absent in the dream experience. We are able, then, to interrogate the experience of the morphai and ask whether we are always carrying so many characters within us, unseen and experiencing.

While lucid dreams exist on a continuum of awareness, they all involve a degree of self-awareness within the dream. This self-awareness, in turn, is associated with changes in dream content. Lucid dreams contain more positive emotions than non-lucid dreams, fewer problems, less verbal aggression, fewer death themes, fewer verbal interactions and a lower number of dream characters.102 Thus while lucid dreaming allows us to solve the experimental challenge of controlling dream content, it comes with a large caveat. Lucid dreams are not an ideal environment to interrogate the function andfeatures of non-lucid dreams.
